





of ⁨2⁩




Simulating FaaS applications at the Edge
Advisors:
– François Lemercier, IRISA, Rennes (francois.lemercier@irisa.fr)
– Nikos Parlavantzas, IRISA, Rennes (nikos.parlavantzas@irisa.fr)
Team: Magellan ( https://team.inria.fr/magellan/)
Keywords: edge computing, FaaS, simulation
Context of the internship: Serverless computing is an increasingly popular model for
delivering cloud services [3]. Serverless isolates developers from the details of infrastructure
management, allowing them to focus on the business logic of their applications. At the
core of serverless is the Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) programming model. In this model,
applications take the form of short-lived, event-triggered functions that incur costs only
during function execution.
Applying the FaaS model to edge computing has recently received significant interest in
research as well as industry [2]. Edge computing refers to taking advantage of computation-
enabled devices located at the edge of network. By allocating resources only during function
execution, FaaS promises reduced resource consumption, which is essential for the resource-
constrained edge nodes. Software that can be deployed at the edge may include networking
services, such as virtual network functions (VNF). The interest of applying FaaS to network
function virtualization (NFV) has already been identified, and research results start to
appear on how virtualized network infrastructures can leverage FaaS [4, 1].
A main challenge for researchers and practitioners seeking to apply the FaaS model to
edge deployments is the shortage of simulation tools. Specifically, although there is a wide
range of simulation tools targeting edge and fog scenarios [8], there are only a few tools
focusing on the FaaS model [6, 7] and, in particular, on executing FaaS applications in edge
environments [5].
Objectives: The aim of this internship is to explore tools for simulating FaaS applica-
tions deployed at the edge. The intern will first study the state-of-the-art in simulation
frameworks for such environments. The intern will then select an existing framework and
apply it to simulate the execution of an IoT application at the edge, potentially including
serverless VNFs. The simulation will be validated using a real IoT application deployed on
the Grid’5000 testbed. Finally, the intern will perform simulation experiments in order to
evaluate the benefits of applying the serverless paradigm to a representative use case.
Skills: Good knowledge of distributed systems. Good programming skills (e.g., Java and
1
Python). Basic knowledge of simulation.
References
[1] Paarijaat Aditya, Istemi Ekin Akkus, Andre Beck, Ruichuan Chen, Volker Hilt, Ivica
Rimac, Klaus Satzke, and Manuel Stein. Will serverless computing revolutionize nfv?
Proceedings of the IEEE, 107(4):667–678, 2019.
[2] Mohammad S. Aslanpour, Adel N. Toosi, Claudio Cicconetti, Bahman Javadi, Peter
Sbarski, Davide Taibi, Marcos Assuncao, Sukhpal Singh Gill, Raj Gaire, and Schahram
Dustdar. Serverless edge computing: Vision and challenges. In 2021 Australasian Com-
puter Science Week Multiconference, ACSW ’21, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[3] Ioana Baldini, Paul Castro, Kerry Chang, Perry Cheng, Stephen Fink, Vatche Ishakian,
Nick Mitchell, Vinod Muthusamy, Rodric Rabbah, Aleksander Slominski, and Philippe
Suter. Serverless Computing: Current Trends and Open Problems, pages 1–20. Springer
Singapore, Singapore, 2017.
[4] Saqib Rasool Chaudhry, Andrei Palade, Aqeel Kazmi, and Siobhán Clarke. Improved
qos at the edge using serverless computing to deploy virtual network functions. IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 7(10):10673–10683, 2020.
[5] Hongseok Jeon, Chunglae Cho, Seungjae Shin, and Seunghyun Yoon. A cloudsim-
extension for simulating distributed functions-as-a-service. In 2019 20th International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies (PD-
CAT), pages 386–391, 2019.
[6] Nima Mahmoudi and Hamzeh Khazaei. Simfaas: A performance simulator for server-
less computing platforms. In Markus Helfert, Donald Ferguson, and Claus Pahl, editors,
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Services Sci-
ence, CLOSER 2021, Online Streaming, April 28-30, 2021, pages 23–33. SCITEPRESS,
2021.
[7] Anja Reuter, Timon Back, and Vasilios Andrikopoulos. Cost efficiency under mixed
serverless and serverful deployments. In 2020 46th Euromicro Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA), pages 242–245, 2020.
[8] Sergej Svorobej, Patricia Takako Endo, Malika Bendechache, Christos Filelis-
Papadopoulos, Konstantinos M. Giannoutakis, George A. Gravvanis, Dimitrios Tzo-
varas, James Byrne, and Theo Lynn. Simulating fog and edge computing scenarios: An
overview and research challenges. Future Internet, 11(3), 2019.
2
